# PODNAME: Dancer::Plugins
# ABSTRACT: interesting plugins to add to Dancer's capabilities

__END__

=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

Dancer::Plugins - interesting plugins to add to Dancer's capabilities

=head1 VERSION

version 1.3202

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Dancer aims to keep the core as small as possible, but there are a growing
number of useful plugins to add helpful features.

This document provides a quick summary of some recommended plugins.

=head1 PLUGINS

=over 4

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Database>

Provides easy database access via DBI, reading the DB connection details from
your app's config file, and taking care of ensuring the connection is still valid
and reconnecting if not (useful in persistent environments).  Just calling the
C<database> keyword gives you a connected and working database handle. It also
provides some helpful keywords to make inserting/updating data as simple as it
should be.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::DBIC>

Provides easy access to DBIx::Class database virtualization.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Auth::RBAC>

Dancer Authentication, Security and Role-Based Access Control Framework.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Email>

Provides easy email-sending powered by Email::Send - simply call the C<email>
keyword.  Email sending settings can be taken from your app's config.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::SMS>

Send SMS text messages to mobile phones from your Dancer app, using any service
supported by L<SMS::Send>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Ajax>

Provides easy way to add Ajax route handlers.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::REST>

Makes writing RESTful web services easy.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::SiteMap>

Automatically provides site maps (as an HTML page, or as an XML sitemap ready for
Google) based on the routes your app defines.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Params::Normalization>

Provides different ways of normalizing parameter names

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::SimpleCRUD>

Provides easy CRUD (create, read, update, delete) facilities, automatically
creating routes to display, add, edit and delete data from a database table.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::WebSocket>

Supports building apps using Web Sockets for bi-directional, full-duplex
communications over a long-lived socket connection.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Memcached>

Cache page responses or individual items of data with memcached for performance.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::MobileDevice>

Quickly determine whether the client is a mobile browser, in order to offer a
simplified layout, or otherwise customise features.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::NYTProf>

Provides dead-simple profiling of your app using L<Devel::NYTProf> - enables
profiling for each request individually, serves up a list of profiling runs, and
generates & sends the HTML reports produced by C<nytprofhtml>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Bcrypt>

Provides simple effective password hashing and validation using Bcrypt.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Cache::CHI>

Provides caching for generated pages and/or arbitrary data.  Uses L<CHI>, so is
backend-agnostic - caching can be done in memory, to files, using Memcache, in a
database, or any other method for which there is a L<CHI::Driver> module.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Thumbnail>

Easy thumbnail generation using L<GD>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Captcha::SecurityImage>

Easy CAPTCHA image generation and validation, using L<GD>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Facebook>

Easily work with Facebook's Graph API from your Perl Dancer app.  Uses
L<Facebook::Graph>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::Redis>

Easy L<Redis> database connections, based upon L<Dancer::Plugin::Database>.

=item L<Dancer::Plugin::XML::RSS>

Easy XML RSS creation and consumption.

=back

More plugins are appearing on CPAN all the time - just search for
C<Dancer::Plugin> to see what may have been released since this document was
last updated!

=head1 AUTHOR

Dancer Core Developers

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is copyright (c) 2010 by Alexis Sukrieh.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=cut
