# PODNAME: Dancer::Policy
# ABSTRACT: Dancer core and community policy and standards of conduct

__END__

=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

Dancer::Policy - Dancer core and community policy and standards of conduct

=head1 VERSION

version 1.3202

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes various policies (most notably, the standards
of conduct) for the Dancer core developers and broad community.

This is what we expect from our community and ourselves and these are
the standards of behavior we set forth in order to make sure the community
remains a safe space for all of its members, without exception.

=head1 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT

These standards applies anywhere the community comes together as a group.
This includes, but is not limited to, the Dancer IRC channel, the Dancer
mailing list, Dancer hackathons, and Dancer conferences.

=over 4

=item *

Always be civil.

=item *

Heed the moderators.

=item *

Abuse is not tolerated.

=back

Civility is simple: stick to the facts while avoiding demeaning remarks and
sarcasm. It is not enough to be factual. You must also be civil. Responding
in kind to incivility is not acceptable.

If the list moderators tell you that you are not being civil, carefully
consider how your words have appeared before responding in any way. You may
protest, but repeated protest in the face of a repeatedly reaffirmed decision
is not acceptable.

Unacceptable behavior will result in a public and clearly identified warning.
Repeated unacceptable behavior will result in removal from the mailing list and
revocation of any commit bit. The first removal is for one month. Subsequent
removals will double in length. After six months with no warning, a user's ban
length is reset. Removals, like warnings, are public.

The list of moderators consists of all active core developers. This includes,
in alphabetical order, Alberto Simões, David Precious, Mickey Nasriachi,
Russell Jenkins, Sawyer X, Stefan Hornburg (Racke), Steven Humphrey, and Yanick
Champoux.

This list might additionally grow to active members of the community who have
stepped up to help handle abusive behavior. If this should happen, this
document would be updated to include their names.

Additionally, it's important to understand the self-regulating nature we
foster at the Dancer community. This means anyone and everyone in the
community - in the channel, on the list, at an event - has the ability to
call out unacceptable behavior and incivility to others in the community.

Moderators are responsibe for issuing warnings and take disciplenary actions,
but anyone may - and is encouraged - to publicly make note of unacceptable
treatment of others.

As a core principle, abuse is never tolerated. One cannot berate, insult,
debase, deride, put-down, or vilify anyone, or act towards anyone in a way
intending to hurt them.

The community specifically considers as abuse any attempts to otherize anyone,
whether by their technical skill, knowledge, gender, sexual orientation,
or any other characteristic.

The community aims to maintain a safe space for everyone, in any forum it
has. If you ever feel this core principle has been compromised, you are strongly
urged to contact a moderator. We are always here.

Remember, this is B<your> community, as much as it is anyone else's.

=head1 CREDITS

This policy has been adopted and adapted from the policy available for
the Perl language development, provided by B<p5p> (the Perl 5 Porters).

The original inspiration policy document can be read at L<perlpolicy>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Dancer Core Developers

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is copyright (c) 2010 by Alexis Sukrieh.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=cut
